Chiggers are tiny mites that live outdoors in grassy or wooded areas near water. They thrive in warm temperatures, especially during the summer months and attach to your clothes and bite your skin. Chigger bites cause itching at the site of the bite, commonly near the seams of tight-fitting clothing.

Overview:

What are chiggers?

Chiggers (trombiculidae) are a species of mite, and are a close relative to spiders and ticks. Chiggers are microscopic and are almost invisible to the naked eye. Once chiggers hatch from eggs (larva), the mites feed on the skin tissue of a host (human or animal) before falling off and turning into an adult mite. Found around the world, chiggers live outdoors on plants in wooded or grassy areas, typically around water. They are most active during the summer months when temperatures are hot.

What are chigger bites?

Chigger larva will attach to your clothing and move to your skin to feed. The chigger larva will release a liquid chemical into your skin to kill skin cells (digestive enzyme). The dead skin cells form a tiny straw (stylostome) for the chigger to drink your skin tissue. The chigger’s chemical causes itching that is very intense for the first 24-48 hours before slowly going away over the next two weeks. Chiggers will fall off of your skin if you begin to scratch.

Who do chigger bites affect?

Chigger bites can affect anyone who might pick chiggers up on their clothing outdoors in grassy, wet or wooded areas.

Where do chiggers bite?

Chiggers live in grass or wooded areas and attach to your clothing. Their favorite sites to feed are areas where your skin and clothing have close contact, especially at waistbands, bra lines and sock lines, or where your skin folds. Common areas where chiggers bite include:

Ankles.
Lower legs.
Behind your knees.
Waist.
Groin.

How common are chigger bites?

Chigger bites are very common in the summer months when temperatures are warm to hot. Many people don’t report chigger bites, so the actual number of cases is unknown.

How do chigger bites affect my body?

You probably won't notice chigger bites right away. It could take up to three hours after the mite makes contact with your skin before you experience any symptoms. Chigger bites cause itching near the bite zone.

Symptoms and Causes:

What are the symptoms of chigger bites?

Symptoms of chigger bites include:

Speckled line of red spots or pimples on your skin.
Bites located where clothing tightly fits on your body.
Severe itch.

How do you get chigger bites?

You can get a chigger bite if you walk through an area where chiggers live, including:

Overgrown fields of grass.
Wooded areas.
Gardens.
Moist soil near water.
Areas with high humidity (80% or over).
Chiggers will attach to your clothing and move onto your skin, where they bite.

Management and Treatment:

How are chigger bites treated?

Because chiggers don't burrow into your skin and the rash usually starts after the mites have already detached from the skin, treatment specifically to remove the mites isn't needed. Instead, treatment for chigger bites focuses on alleviating itchiness, including:

Using topical creams or lotion (calamine lotion).
Taking diphenhydramine (Benadryl ®) or other antihistamines.
Using an anti-parasite medication (permethrin).
Applying a cold compress.
Cleaning the affected area of skin with soap and water regularly.

If severe itching causes an infection, where the skin turns red, swells or leaks pus, your healthcare provider may prescribe antibiotics.

How long do chigger bites last?

The itchiness is most intense during the first 24-48 hours after the bite. Symptoms will slowly go away and stop after two weeks.

Is there a home remedy to treat chigger bites?

Chigger bites can be treated at home by using an over-the-counter anti-itch cream like calamine lotion and/or taking antihistamines to reduce itching. Chiggers don't burrow into your skin, so there is no need for any other at-home remedies.

How soon after treatment will I feel better?

You will feel relief immediately through the use of anti-itch creams or antihistamines, but the symptoms can last for up to two weeks, lessening in severity over time.

Prevention:

How can I reduce my risk of getting chigger bites?

You can prevent chigger bites by:

Wearing protective clothing when outdoors (long sleeve shirts, tall socks, long pants tucked into boots).
Prior to outdoor activities, treat clothing with repellant to repel insects and mites.
Using a bug spray or mosquito repellant.
Avoiding outdoor activities near grassy, wet and wooded areas in the summer during warm temperatures.

Living With:

How do I take care of myself if I have chigger bites?

After a bite, be sure to treat the affected area with an anti-itch cream or lotion to prevent itching. You might want to trim your fingernails to avoid skin tears and further irritation if you feel the need to scratch. You should wash your clothing in hot water or treat it with pyrethroid insecticides.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should seek care from your healthcare provider if:

Itchiness is causing extreme discomfort.
The bites turn into open wounds due to itching.
The itching doesn't go away after two weeks.
Your skin around the bite swells or leaks pus (infected).
What questions should I ask my doctor?
Do I need to use an anti-parasite medication?
What types of creams or lotions do you recommend to stop the itching?
Should I take antihistamines to stop the itching?

Overview
Scrub typhus, also known as bush typhus, is a disease caused by bacteria called Orientia tsutsugamushi. Scrub typhus is spread to people through bites of infected chiggers (larval mites). The most common symptoms of scrub typhus include fever, headache, body aches, and rash.

Most cases of scrub typhus occur in rural areas of Southeast Asia, Indonesia, China, Japan, the Indian subcontinent, and northern Australia. Anyone living in or traveling to areas where scrub typhus is found could get infected.

Signs and symptoms
Symptoms of scrub typhus usually begin within 10 days after infection. Signs and symptoms include:

Fever and chills
Headache
Body aches and muscle pain
A dark, scab-like region at the site of the chigger bite (also known as eschar)
Mental changes, ranging from confusion to coma
Enlarged lymph nodes
Rash
If not treated appropriately, scrub typhus can be fatal and may lead to organ damage and severe bleeding.

Prevention
No vaccine is available to prevent scrub typhus. Reduce your risk of getting scrub typhus by avoiding contact with infected chiggers. When traveling to areas where scrub typhus is common, avoid areas with lots of vegetation and brush where chiggers may be found.

If you will be spending time outdoors:

Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellents containing DEET or other active ingredients registered for use against chiggers, on exposed skin and clothing.
Always follow product instructions.
Reapply insect repellent as directed.
If you are also using sunscreen, apply sunscreen before applying insect repellent.
If you have a baby or child:
Dress your child in clothing that covers arms and legs.
Do not apply insect repellent onto a child's hands, eyes, or mouth or on cuts or irritated skin.
Spray insect repellent onto your hands and then apply to child's face.
Treat clothing and gear with 0.5% permethrin or purchase permethrin-treated items.
Permethrin kills chiggers and can be used to treat boots, clothing, and camping gear.
Treated clothing remains protective after multiple washings. See product information to learn how long the protection will last.
If treating items yourself, follow the product instructions carefully.
Do NOT use permethrin products directly on skin. They are intended to treat clothing.

Testing and diagnosis
The symptoms of scrub typhus are similar to many other diseases. See your healthcare provider if you develop the symptoms listed above after spending time in areas where scrub typhus is found.

If you have recently traveled, tell your healthcare provider where and when you traveled.

Your healthcare provider may order blood tests to look for scrub typhus or other diseases.

Laboratory testing and reporting of results can take several weeks, so your healthcare provider may start treatment before results are available.

Treatment
Scrub typhus should be treated with the antibiotic doxycycline. Doxycycline can be used in persons of any age.
Antibiotics are most effective if given soon after symptoms begin.
People who are treated early with doxycycline usually recover quickly.
