Flea bites are small, discolored bumps on your skin that come from fleas feeding on your blood. Fleas are small insects known as vectors (living things that carry diseases between animals and humans). Vectors often carry infections through blood.

Overview:

What are flea bites?

Flea bites are small, discolored bumps on your skin that come from a flea feeding on your blood.

Fleas are tiny, wingless insects. They are dark brown or black and have flat bodies. They have six legs, strong claws on the bottoms of their legs that allow them to hold onto a host and mouthparts that pierce your skin and feed on your blood. Their hind legs are longer and stronger than their legs in the middle and the front, allowing them to jump over 12 inches.

There are more than 2,500 flea species in the world and more than 300 species in the United States.

Flea bites rarely cause any lasting harm. They cause mild annoyance and irritation for a short period. However, flea bites can be dangerous because they may spread diseases that can be serious or even fatal.

Where are fleas found?

Fleas are most active when the weather is warm. Outside, fleas prefer cool, damp areas with a lot of shade. They live around trees, leaves, tall grass and shrubs. Fleas hop onto animals when they walk by these areas.

On dogs, cats and other animals, fleas live around the ears, neck, back and belly (abdomen). Once inside your home, fleas may jump off an infested animal and hide. They often hide in carpet, furniture, bedding and cracks in the floor.

Why do fleas bite?

Male and female fleas feed on blood. Female fleas lay eggs after feeding on blood. In some flea species, especially the species that commonly bother dogs and cats, baby fleas (larvae) feed on blood-rich adult flea poop (feces). Flea poop is also called flea dirt.

Do fleas bite humans?

Fleas bite humans. However, the flea species that commonly bother dogs and cats don’t live on humans. Dogs and cats have much more hair than humans. Fleas like animals with a lot of fur because fur allows them to hide easily.

What happens when a flea bites you?

Fleas have strong claws on the ends of their legs that they use to hold onto a host. Their mouthparts include a tiny needle (proboscis) that pierces your skin, sucks your blood and secretes saliva into your bloodstream.

Why do flea bites itch?

When a flea secretes saliva into your bloodstream, your body registers the saliva as an allergen. Your immune system then sends the chemical histamine to the area where the flea bit you to remove the allergen from your body. Histamine is what causes your flea bites to itch and swell. Most people have a flea bite allergy.

Who is at risk of being bitten by a flea?

Fleas prefer to bite animals. If there isn’t an animal in the area, fleas will bite anyone. The following factors attract fleas:

Body heat.
Breathing (carbon dioxide or CO2).
Movement.
Vibrations.

Symptoms and Causes:

What do flea bites look like on humans?

After a flea bites you, a small, discolored bump forms. A discolored ring or halo may appear around the bite. Flea bites may appear in a straight line or a cluster of many bites.

Flea bites most commonly occur on your legs, especially your feet, calves and ankles. Flea bites rarely appear above your knee, unless you spend a lot of time sitting or lying down.

What causes a flea bite?

Male and female fleas bite. They feed on your blood as part of their diet. Female fleas lay eggs after feeding on blood. In some flea species, flea babies feed on adult flea poop, which contains blood.

What are the symptoms of a flea bite?

The symptoms of a flea bite vary. If the flea has a disease or an allergic reaction occurs, the symptoms may be more severe.

Common symptoms include:

Itchy and irritated skin.
A discolored ring around the bite.
More severe symptoms can include:

An allergic reaction (hives, rash, shortness of breath and swelling).
Infection of a disease carried by a flea (fever, headache, body aches, rashes, nausea, abdominal pain, weight loss, dizziness and weakness can accompany various diseases).

Management and Treatment:

How are flea bites treated?

Flea bites typically don’t need treatment. Over-the-counter anti-itch creams or ointments and antihistamines can relieve itchy skin and discomfort. However, see your healthcare provider if more severe symptoms develop after a bite (allergic reaction, fever, headache or body aches).

How do I stop flea bites from itching?

Don’t scratch your flea bites. You risk breaking your skin and exposing yourself to infection. If you accidentally break your skin, keep the area clean by washing it with soap and water and covering your flea bites with a bandage. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have an infected flea bite.

Flea bites only last a few days. However, there are many over-the-counter products or home remedies that can stop flea bites from itching.

Home remedies are safe for most people. However, it’s a good idea to check with your healthcare provider before trying some of the following options to get rid of your flea bites. You may be at risk of developing an allergic reaction on your skin.

Antihistamines: Antihistamines are a popular flea bite treatment. Histamine is a chemical created by your immune system. Your body releases histamine after it encounters an allergen. Histamine is what makes flea bites itch. You can take an antihistamine as a pill, or you can apply it directly to your flea bite as a cream or ointment.
Hydrocortisone: Hydrocortisone is a corticosteroid combined with an anesthetic pain reliever. It relieves itching and swelling. You can apply it directly to your flea bite as a cream or ointment.
Ice: Ice can slow down the amount of blood that flows to an area. It reduces inflammation, pain, swelling and itchiness. Apply an ice pack covered in a light towel over the area for at least 10 minutes for flea bite relief.
Aloe vera: Aloe vera is a succulent plant. The gel in its leaves contains salicylic acid, which relieves itching and pain. You can apply aloe gel directly to your flea bite.
Chamomile tea: Chamomile tea contains dried chamomile flowers. The dried chamomile flowers contain terpenoids and flavonoids, which are natural chemicals that have antioxidant and antihistamine properties. To treat a flea bite, add a chamomile tea bag to water. Let the tea bag steep for at least 20 minutes until the water is a rich gold-brown color. Remove the tea bag from the water and squeeze the tea bag to remove excess water. Press the tea bag to your flea bites for at least 10 minutes, and then wipe your bites with a clean towel. Put the wet tea bag in a container in your refrigerator so that you can reuse it on your bites throughout the day.
Honey: Honey has many properties that relieve itching and pain. Honey contains an enzyme called catalase, which provides relief for minor inflammation. Put on enough unprocessed honey to lightly cover your flea bites. To avoid accidentally creating a sticky mess, you can also put a bandage on top of your honey-covered flea bites.
Oatmeal: Oatmeal contains properties that can soothe itchy flea bites. The best way to use oatmeal to treat your flea bites is to grind it into a fine powder (colloidal oatmeal) in a blender or food processor. Mix the oatmeal powder with warm water until it becomes a thick, sticky paste. Apply enough of the oatmeal paste to completely cover your flea bites. After at least 10 minutes, wipe off the paste with a clean towel.

Prevention:

How do I stop getting bitten by fleas?

To stop flea bites, you must get rid of the fleas. Fleas are more likely to bite your pet. Check your pet for fleas around their ears, neck, back, and belly. Part your pet’s fur and look around its skin. If you find fleas, here are some removal options:

Flea comb: The tines on a flea comb are very close together. When you brush your pet’s fur, fleas get stuck in the tines. If you see fleas in the comb, dunk the comb in a bowl of soapy water.
Flea shampoo: Soak your pet in warm water and thoroughly apply a flea shampoo. Avoid getting shampoo in your pet’s eyes and mouth.
Medicine: Give your pet over-the-counter or prescription flea medicines. Some medicines are oral (taken by mouth). Other medicines are topical (put on the skin).
Wash the bedding: Wash your pet’s bedding in hot water every few days. Wash your bedding in hot water, too, especially if your pet sleeps with you. Dry the bedding on the highest heat setting.
Vacuum: Use a strong vacuum to thoroughly clean your carpets, rugs and fabric furniture. When you finish, immediately empty the vacuum’s contents into a bag, seal it and throw it away outside.

Bed bug bites vs. flea bites
Like fleas, bed bugs feed off your blood and secrete saliva into your bloodstream. Bed bug bites look similar to flea bites. However, bed bug bites often exhibit a distinct line or zigzag pattern. Bed bugs are active at night, and they’ll bite your exposed skin while you’re sleeping, including your face, hands, arms, feet and legs.

Flea bites vs. mosquito bites
Mosquitos are small, flying insects. They also feed off your blood and secrete saliva into your bloodstream. Mosquito bites look a little different than flea bites. After a mosquito bites you, a small, raised bump forms. The raised bump may change colors, and you can sometimes see a small, dark spot in the center. The dark spot is where the bite occurred.

Living With:

How do fleas spread disease?

Fleas spread disease through their bites. Fleas are vectors (living things that carry diseases between animals and humans). Vectors often carry infections through blood. Many of the creatures classified as vectors are bloodsuckers. Other vectors include ticks, mosquitoes and sandflies.

In rare cases, fleas can spread tapeworms and other parasites to animals and people. Parasites can spread if a person or animal were to swallow an infected flea accidentally. In houses with a flea infestation, young children are more likely to get a parasite than adults. Young children spend more time on the floor, and fleas like to hide in carpets and cracks.

What types of diseases can be spread by flea bites?

Fleas sometimes carry diseases that can infect humans. Some of those diseases include:

Plague

Plague most commonly affects small rodents in Africa, Asia, North America and South America. Most human cases of plague in the United States occur in the western part of the country, especially in rural New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, Utah, California, Oregon and Nevada. Infected fleas can transmit plague to humans. Humans can also get plague after handling an infected animal. Symptoms of plague include:

Flu-like symptoms like fever, aches and chills.
Low blood pressure.
Bleeding under the skin or other organs.
Weakness.
Shortness of breath.
Pain in the chest and/or abdomen.
Nausea and/or vomiting.
Endemic murine typhus

Endemic murine typhus commonly occurs in warm coastal areas in tropical and subtropical regions. Most cases in the United States occur in southern California and Texas. Infected fleas transmit endemic murine typhus to humans through flea poop. Infected flea poop enters your body through broken skin — typically from scratching a flea bite — or by inhaling it through your mouth or nose. Symptoms of endemic murine typhus include:

General discomfort.
Headache.
Pain in your muscles and/or joints.
Nausea and/or vomiting.
Fever and/or chills.
Rash.
Cough.
Cat Scratch Disease (CSD)

CSD commonly occurs throughout the world. In moderate climates, more cases occur during the fall and winter seasons. In tropical climates, cases occur throughout the year. Fleas pass on the bacteria _Bartonella _to cats. Fleas can sometimes pass the bacteria to dogs or other animals. Infected cats also pass the bacteria during fights with other cats. Cats — especially kittens — pass the infection to humans through a bite or scratch. Symptoms of CSD include:

A small, discolored blister or pimple near the scratch or bite.
Swollen, painful lymph nodes.
General discomfort.
Fever.
Night sweats.
Weight loss.
Parasites

Tapeworm larvae and the larvae of other parasites sometimes infect fleas. Infected fleas can spread parasites to animals and humans. Animals and humans must swallow an infected flea to acquire a parasite. Animals may swallow an infected flea while grooming. Humans rarely acquire parasites from infected fleas. Most cases involve children, who spend more time on the ground around places where fleas hide. Symptoms of parasites include:

Nausea.
Weakness.
Weight loss.
Abdominal pain.
Dizziness.
Headache.
When should I see a healthcare provider?
You should see a healthcare provider if you experience an allergic reaction to flea bites or develop symptoms of a disease or parasite carried by fleas.


Fleaborne diseases of the United States
In the United States, some fleas carry pathogens that can cause human disease, including:

Plague — most commonly spread to humans in the United States by infected ground squirrel fleas, or globally by infected Oriental rat fleas. Plague can also be spread by improperly handling a plague infected animal. Most U.S. cases of plague occur in rural areas of the western United States.
Murine typhus — spread to people by infected cat fleas, infected Oriental rat fleas, or their feces. Most cases in the United States are reported from California, Texas, and Hawaii.
Cat scratch disease (CSD) — spread to humans most often through the scratch of a domestic or feral cat that has been infested with Ctenocephalides felis fleas. The germ that causes the illness is shed in the flea feces and are introduced through the cat's scratch. CSD occurs wherever cats and fleas are found.
Fleaborne parasites, such as tapeworms can spread to people and animals if they accidentally swallow an infected flea. Small children are at a higher risk than adults, as they may spend more time close to the floor and carpeted areas where fleas are found. Most infected people will not show symptoms and will not know they are carrying tapeworms.

How it spreads
How fleas spread disease
Fleas transmit germs that cause disease primarily through the processes of feeding on hosts or through fecal contamination, when infected flea feces (poop; also called “flea dirt”) are scratched into an open wound.

How fleas find their hosts
Fleas prefer animal hosts but will resort to biting people when animals are unavailable. Adult fleas find hosts by detecting body heat, movement, the vibrations caused by movement, and breathing.

The best way to prevent fleas on people is to keep pets free of fleas.
Most fleas in the United States prefer to feed on animals, however, people are sometimes bitten when they share space or have contact with a flea-infested animal.

Prevention tips
Preventing fleas on your pets
Dogs and cats are very susceptible to fleas, but they can be protected. To prevent fleas on your pet:

Limit the amount of time your pet spends outdoors.
Limit contact with wild and stray animals.
Bathe and brush pets regularly.
Check for fleas regularly.
Fleas prefer warmer and more humid months, but if there is an animal to feed on, fleas can survive year-round.
Talk to your veterinarian about flea control products that are right for your pet.
Treat pets for fleas year-round in order to kill adult fleas and prevent new ones from hatching.
Always follow product instructions.
If you find a flea on your pet or in your home, learn how to get rid of fleas right away to avoid further infestation.

Preventing flea bites
Keep pets free of fleas (see tips below).
Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, IR3535, Oil of Lemon Eucalyptus (OLE), para-menthane-diol (PMD), or 2-undecanone. EPA's helpful search tool can help you find the product that best suits your needs. Always follow product instructions. Do not use products containing OLE or PMD on children under 3 years old.
Cover skin with long-sleeve clothing and pants to minimize exposure to bites. Flea bites often occur on the lower legs and feet, protect these areas with long socks and pants.
Treat clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin. Permethrin can be used to treat boots, clothing and camping gear and remain protective through several washings. Alternatively, you can buy permethrin-treated clothing and gear.
Do not feed or pet stray or wild animals.
Always wear gloves if you are handling sick or dead animals.

Keeping fleas out of the home and yard
It's easier to keep fleas out of your home than it is to get rid of them. Fleas can live in carpets, bedding, and other surfaces in the home that pets frequent. To prevent an infestation:

Sweep or vacuum well and often. Vacuum your carpets and rugs as well as cushions on chairs and sofas. Be sure to empty the vacuum bag outside when finished.
Clean bedding, especially pet bedding, frequently with soap and water.
In the yard, fleas prefer habitats with shade, as they cannot tolerate the sun for long periods. To prevent flea infestations, make your yard as unattractive to fleas as possible by:

Mowing frequently. Mowing exposes the soil to the sun, which fleas try to avoid.
Avoiding over-watering. Fleas thrive in humid environments so keeping the yard dry makes it less inviting.
Treating dog runs with insecticides to make it less prone to fleas.
Raking thoroughly to remove any debris. This increases flea exposure to potential insecticides and removes any shaded and humid breeding places.
Keep rodents and animals (e.g. opossums) away from your home:
Store food, including pet food, in tight sealing containers.
Remove brush, rock piles, junk, and cluttered firewood outside of your home.
Seal up holes in your home where rodents can enter.
Keep tight lids on compost and trash cans.
