Most spider bites only rarely cause serious problems. You may have redness, swelling and pain in the bite area. Bites from black widow, brown recluse and hobo spiders are more serious. They may cause trouble breathing, a severe headache and painful muscle cramps that require immediate medical care. You can take steps to prevent spider bites.

Overview:

What are spider bites?

Spider bites — especially bites that can harm humans — are rare. All spiders make venom (a poison) that they use to paralyze and kill their prey. But most spiders aren’t aggressive to people, and their fangs are too small to puncture human skin. Spiders usually only bite humans when they feel threatened, like when you trap them or unintentionally make contact with them.

For the most part, spiders perform a vital function by eating insects that can destroy crops.

When to worry about a spider bite
There are at least 60 different spider species in America, but only a few pose any danger to humans. These more dangerous spiders include:

Black widows: These black spiders have a red, hourglass shape on their bellies. Black widows like to build webs in woodpiles, building overhangs (eaves), fences and outhouses. They mostly live in the Western and Southern U.S.
Brown recluses: Sometimes called fiddleback or violin spiders, these brown spiders have a dark, violin-shaped mark on their heads. Brown recluses live in Midwestern and Southern states. They like dry, sheltered areas, such as piles of wood, rocks and leaves. Indoors, brown recluses seek out dark closets, attics and shoes.
Hobo spiders: These brown spiders have a grey V-shaped (herringbone) pattern on their bellies. They build funnel-shaped webs in dark, moist basements, crawl spaces, window wells and woodpiles. Hobo spiders are mostly found in the Pacific Northwest.

Other types of spider bites
There are almost 50,000 different spider species around the world. While most spiders are too small and their venom too weak to cause any danger to humans, they’ll still bite when they feel threatened. In the U.S., nonpoisonous spider bites include:

Wolf spider bite: Wolf spider bites may tear your skin and cause redness, pain and swelling. But you usually don’t need to seek medical attention. Wolf spiders can be found throughout the U.S. They get their name from the way they stalk their prey like a wolf. Wolf spiders can be brown or gray and reach 3 to 4 inches long. They can be large and hairy and are sometimes mistaken for tarantulas.
Camel spider bite: Camel spider bites are very rare. While they look and sound scary, camel spiders don’t usually bite. They can run 10 miles per hour and make a screaming sound while running. Camel spiders have long bodies that make them look like scorpions. They’re light brown and can reach lengths of 5 inches. Camel spiders can be found in the deserts of the Southwestern U.S.
Jumping spider bite: Jumping spider bites are one of the most common house spider bites. Jumping spiders have short, hairy bodies and range in length from one-fifth to three-quarters of an inch. Jumping spiders get their name because they move erratically and jump from one location to another. They live throughout the U.S. and are usually found outside in gardens and vegetation.
Banana spider bite: Banana spider bites can feel kind of like a bee sting. The bite may produce mild redness and stinging, but it should quickly go away. Female banana spiders have long, yellow-spotted bodies that look like a banana. They can reach about 3 inches long. Male banana spiders are dark brown and not as long. Banana spiders can be found in warm regions from North Carolina to the Gulf states, typically in woodlands and forests.

How common are spider bites?

Experts aren’t sure how many people get spider bites every year. Most of the time, you may not know a spider bit you. Or you may think an insect bit you, instead of a spider.

Bites from black widows or brown recluses are most dangerous to children (because of their small size) and people age 60 and older (who may be weaker or in poor health). In the U.S., fewer than 3 people die every year from a spider bite. Most of these deaths occur in children.

Symptoms and Causes:

What are the symptoms of a spider bite?

Spider bite symptoms vary depending on the type of spider.

Black widow spider bites cause an immediate, sharp, pinprick-like pain. The bite area then becomes numb. Other signs of a black widow spider bite include:

Difficulty breathing.
Droopy or swollen eyes.
Headache.
Increased saliva production.
Nausea and vomiting.
Painful muscle cramps and stiffness in your stomach, shoulders, chest and back.
Profuse sweating.
Itchy skin rash.
Brown recluse spider bites aren’t immediately painful or noticeable. Instead, you might feel pain an hour after the bite. Other signs of a brown recluse spider bite include:

A blister surrounded by a bruise or reddish skin color (similar to a bull’s-eye). The blister may rupture and form a skin ulcer that later scars.
Itchy skin in the bite area or all over your body.

Hobo spider bites rarely cause pain. Signs of a hobo spider bite include:

Severe headache within minutes or hours after the bite. This headache may last for a week.
Hardened skin in the bite area within 30 minutes of the bite.
Red, swollen skin.
Blisters that produce pus.
Fatigue.
Nausea.
Cognitive impairment (memory problems).

What does a spider bite look like?

If you’ve been bitten by a spider, you may see a set of tiny fang marks where the spider broke your skin. You may have a small bump or a blister at the site. In addition, you may notice mild swelling and redness or skin discoloration.

What causes spider bites?

Spiders aren’t typically aggressive toward humans. Bites occur when spiders feel threatened and need to defend themselves.

What are the risk factors for spider bites?

Anyone can accidentally come into contact with a spider and get bitten. Still, some people may be more at risk because their jobs or actions put them in closer contact with places where spiders live. People at risk include:

Outdoor workers, including landscapers, groundskeepers and farmworkers.
Children who play in piles of leaves or rocks.
Hikers.
Janitors.
Machine operators.

What are the complications of a spider bite?

Some brown recluse bites cause a skin ulcer (wound). If the wound doesn’t heal, you might need surgery.

Black widow bites are the most serious. Children under 16 and people older than 60 may need hospitalization to treat:
Breathing problems.
Heart issues.
High blood pressure.
Severe muscle pain and cramping.

Management and Treatment:

How do you treat a spider bite?

Spider bite treatment will vary depending on your symptoms and the type of spider that bit you.

Treatment for black widow spider bites may include:

Black widow antivenom (antivenin).
Muscle relaxers.
Sedatives.
Pain medicines.
Treatment for brown recluse and hobo spider bites include:

Daily cleaning with a povidone-iodine solution to prevent infection.
Soaking the bite area in sterile saltwater (saline) solution three times a day.
What should I do if a spider bites me?
You should never attempt to suck out or remove venom from a spider bite. Instead, follow these steps:

Clean the bite area with warm water and soap.
Apply a cold, damp washcloth or an ice pack to the bite area.
Elevate the bite area.
Take an antihistamine (allergy medicine) to ease itching and swelling.
Take an over-the-counter (OTC) pain reliever for pain and swelling.
Seek immediate medical attention for severe symptoms.

Prevention:

How can I protect myself from spider bites?

To protect yourself and your family from spider bites:

Apply insect repellant that’s registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Keep firewood outside and check it for spiders before bringing it into the house.
Shake your shoes, hats and gloves to check for spiders before putting them on.
Treat clothing and shoes with permethrin, an insecticide.
Wear gloves when carrying wood, working in the garden, moving rocks or in other outdoor settings.
Wear long sleeves and pants in wooded areas.

Living With:

When should I call my healthcare provider?

You should call your provider if you experience:

Difficulty breathing.
Heart palpitations, a racing pulse or other heart problems.
Nausea and vomiting.
Severe muscle pain, cramps, weakness or paralysis.
Signs of infection, such as fever or yellow discharge from the bite area.
Vision problems or severe headache.

What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

If you have concerns about a spider bite, you may want to ask your healthcare provider:

What’s the best treatment for my symptoms?
How can I prevent future spider bites?
Am I at risk for other problems?
Should I look out for signs of complications?


Outdoor workers may encounter venomous spiders.
Black widows and brown recluses are some types of venomous spiders in the United States.

Venomous spiders found in the United States include the black widow and the brown recluse. These spiders can be dangerous to outdoor workers. Spiders are usually not aggressive, and most bites occur because a spider is trapped or touched.


Types
Black widow spiders
Have a pattern of red coloration on the underside of their abdomen.
Build webs between objects.
Bites may occur when contact is made with their webs.
Bites have two puncture marks.
The venom is a neurotoxin that produces pain at the bite area and then spreads to the chest, abdomen, or the entire body.
Found:
Throughout North America, but are most common in the southern and western United States.
In workplaces containing undisturbed areas such as woodpiles, eaves, fences, and areas where debris has accumulated.
Living in outdoor toilets where there are lots of flies.
Brown recluse spiders
Also known as the violin spider.
Brown with a dark violin-shaped marking on its head.
Has six equal-sized eyes (most spiders have eight eyes).
Cannot bite humans without counterpressure, like if it is accidentally trapped against the skin.
Bites may cause a stinging sensation with localized pain. A small white blister usually develops at the site of the bite.
The venom can cause a severe lesion by destroying skin tissue (skin necrosis). This skin lesion will require professional medical attention.
Found:
In the midwestern and southern United States.
In workplaces with secluded, dry, sheltered areas such as under structures or logs or in piles of rocks or leaves.
Indoors in dark closets, shoes, or attics.
Symptoms
Symptoms associated with spider bites can vary from minor to severe. Although extremely rare, death can occur in the most severe cases.

Possible symptoms resulting from a spider bite include:

Itching or rash
Pain radiating from the bite, muscle pain, or muscle cramping
Reddish to purplish color or blister
Sweating, fever, or chills
Difficulty breathing
Headache
Nausea and vomiting
Anxiety or restlessness
High blood pressure
Prevention
Employers can protect their workers from spider bites by training them on:

Their risk of exposure to spiders.
How to identify spiders.
How to prevent exposure to spiders.
What they should do if they are bitten by a spider.
Workers can take the following preventive steps:

Inspect or shake out any clothing, shoes, towels, or equipment before use.
Wear protective clothing such as a long-sleeved shirt and long pants, hat, gloves, and boots when handling stacked or undisturbed piles of materials.
Minimize the empty spaces between stacked materials.
Remove and reduce debris and rubble from around the outdoor work areas.
Trim or eliminate tall grasses from around outdoor work areas.
Store apparel and outdoor equipment in tightly closed plastic bags.
Keep tetanus boosters up-to-date (every 10 years). Spider bites can become infected with tetanus spores.
First Aid
If a worker is bitten by a spider:

Stay calm.
Identify the type of spider if it is possible to do so safely to aid in medical treatment.
Wash the bite area with soap and water.
Apply a cloth dampened with cold water or filled with ice to the bite area to reduce swelling.
Elevate bite area if possible.
Do not attempt to remove venom.
Immediately notify a supervisor and seek professional medical attention.


Black widow spider
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook X Pinterest
The black widow spider (Latrodectus genus) has a shiny black body with a red hourglass-shape on its belly area. The venomous bite of a black widow spider is toxic. The genus of spiders, to which the black widow belongs, contains the largest number of venomous species known.

This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage a black widow spider bite. If you or someone you are with is bitten, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.

Poisonous Ingredient
The venom of the black widow spider contains toxic chemicals, including the neurotoxin alpha latrotoxin, that make people sick.

Where Found
Black widow spiders are found throughout the United States, mostly in the South and West. They are usually found in barns, sheds, stone walls, fences, woodpiles, porch furniture, and other outdoor structures. They are usually, but not always, found near ground level, or within a few feet of the ground. They make irregular, asymmetrical, "disorganized" looking webs.

This genus of spider species is found worldwide. They are most plentiful in temperate and subtropical climates, especially during the summer months, and are common throughout the southern United States.

Wear protective clothing when traveling through areas where these spiders live. DO NOT put your hands or feet in their nests or in their preferred hiding places, such as dark, sheltered areas under logs or underbrush, or other damp, moist areas.

Symptoms
The first symptom of a black widow bite is usually pain similar to a pinprick. This is felt when the bite is made. Some people may not feel it. Minor swelling, redness, and a target-shaped sore may appear.

After 15 minutes to 1 hour, a dull muscle pain spreads from the bite area to the whole body.

If the bite is on the upper body, you will usually feel most of the pain in your chest.
If the bite is on your lower body, you will usually feel most of the pain in your abdomen.
The following symptoms can also occur:

Anxiety
Difficulty breathing
Headache
High blood pressure
Increased saliva
Increased sweating
Light sensitivity
Muscle weakness
Nausea and vomiting
Numbness and tingling around the bite site, then sometimes spreading out from the bite
Restlessness
Seizures (usually seen just before death in children who are bitten)
Very painful muscle cramps or spasms
Facial swelling in the hours after the bite (This pattern of swelling is sometimes confused with an allergy to the drug used in treatment.)
Pregnant women may have contractions and go into labor.

Home Care
Black widow spider bites are very toxic. Seek medical help right away. Call the Poison Control Center for guidance.

Follow these steps until medical help is given:

Clean the area with soap and water.
Wrap ice in a clean cloth and place it on the bite area. Leave it on for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has blood flow problems, decrease the time that the ice is on the area to prevent possible skin damage.
Keep the affected area still, if possible, to prevent the venom from spreading. A homemade splint may be helpful if the bite was on the arms, legs, hands, or feet.
Loosen clothing and remove rings and other tight jewelry.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:

Person's age, weight, and condition
Time the bite occurred
Area on the body where the bite occurred
Type of spider, if possible

What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If possible, bring the spider to the emergency room. Put it in a secure container.

The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:

Antivenin, a medicine to reverse the effects of the venom, if available
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-rays, abdominal x-rays, or both
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, or through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
In general, children, pregnant women, and older people may need to be given Latrodectus antivenin to reverse the effect of the venom. However, it can sometimes cause serious allergic reactions and must be used carefully.

Outlook (Prognosis)
Severe symptoms usually start to improve within 2 to 3 days, but milder symptoms may last for several weeks. Death in a healthy person is very rare. Young children, people who are very ill, and older people may not survive a bite.


Brown recluse spider
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook X Pinterest
Brown recluse spiders are between 1 and 1 1/2 inches (2.5 to 3.5 centimeters) long. They have a dark brown, violin-shaped mark on their upper body and light brown legs. Their lower body may be dark brown, tan, yellow, or greenish. They also have 3 pairs of eyes, instead of the usual 4 pairs other spiders have. The bite of a brown recluse spider is venomous.

Poisonous Ingredient
The venom of the brown recluse spider contains toxic chemicals that make people sick.

Where Found
The brown recluse spider is most common in the south and central states of the United States, especially in Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Louisiana, eastern Texas, and Oklahoma. However, they have been found in several large cities outside these areas.

The brown recluse spider prefers dark, sheltered areas, such as under porches and in woodpiles.

Wear protective clothing when traveling through areas where these spiders live. DO NOT put your hands or feet in their nests or in their preferred hiding places, such as dark, sheltered areas under logs or underbrush, or other damp, moist areas.

Symptoms
When the spider bites you, you may feel a sharp sting or nothing at all. Pain usually develops within the first several hours after being bitten, and may become severe. Children may have more serious reactions.

Symptoms may include:

Chills
Itching
General ill-feeling or discomfort
Fever
Nausea
Reddish or purplish color in a circle around bite
Sweating
Large sore (ulcer) in the area of the bite
Rarely, these symptoms may occur:

Coma (lack of responsiveness)
Blood in urine
Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)
Kidney failure
Seizures
In serious cases, blood supply is cut off from the area of the bite. This results in black tissue scarring (eschar) at the site. The eschar sloughs off after about 2 to 5 weeks, leaving an ulcer through skin and fatty tissue. The ulcer may take many months to heal and leave a deep scar.

Home Care
Seek emergency medical treatment right away. Call 911 or the local emergency number, or poison control.

Follow these steps until medical help is given:

Clean the area with soap and water.
Wrap ice in a clean cloth and place it on the bite area. Leave it on for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has blood flow problems, decrease the time that the ice is on the area to prevent possible skin damage.
Keep the affected area still, if possible, to prevent the venom from spreading. A homemade splint may be helpful if the bite was on the arms, legs, hands, or feet.
Loosen clothing and remove rings and other tight jewelry.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:

Person's age, weight, and condition
The body part affected
The time the bite occurred
The type of spider, if known
Take the person to the emergency room for treatment. The bite may not look serious, but it can take some time to become severe. Treatment is important to reduce complications. If possible, place the spider in a secure container and bring it to the emergency room for identification.


What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the spider to the emergency room with you, if possible. Make sure it is in a secure container.

The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.

Symptoms will be treated. Because brown recluse spider bites can be painful, pain medicines may be given. Antibiotics may also be prescribed if the wound is infected.

If the wound is near a joint (such as a knee or elbow), the arm or leg may be placed into a brace or sling. If practical, elevate the arm or leg.

In more serious reactions, the person may receive:

Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, or through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
With proper medical attention, survival past 48 hours is usually a sign that recovery will follow. Even with appropriate and quick treatment, symptoms may last for several days to weeks. The original bite, which may be small, may progress to a blood blister and look like a bull's eye. It may then become deeper, and additional symptoms such as fever, chills, and other signs of additional organ system involvement may develop. If scarring from an ulcer has developed, surgery may be needed to improve the appearance of the scar formed at the site of the bite.

Death from brown recluse spider bites is more common in children than adults.

Pest Notes: Introduction
Contrary to popular belief, there are no populations of the brown recluse, Loxosceles reclusa, in California. In fact, fewer than 20 verified specimens have been collected in the state over several decades by spider experts. Yet people in California frequently relate stories in which they or someone they know was supposedly bitten or they have had a physician diagnose them with a brown recluse spider bite.

Black widows on the other hand, are very common throughout the state, causing potentially serious injury with their bite. The adult females are easily identifiable by their shiny black body color and red hourglass on the belly. For information on black widows, see the Pest Notes: Widow Spiders and Their Relatives.

Although the brown recluse does not live in California, four species of native recluse spiders occur in southern areas of the state and can cause similar medical concerns. The most common Californian recluse spider is the desert recluse, Loxosceles deserta. It is found mostly in the Sonoran and Mojave deserts, in the foothills of the lower San Joaquin Valley, and in adjacent areas of Mexico; most of these areas are sparsely populated by humans.

All Loxosceles spiders tested so far have the venom component that is capable of causing necrotic skin lesions, so it is best to assume that all recluse spiders may be capable of causing skin damage. In general, the desert recluse spider's venom is similar to that of the brown recluse and should be considered of equal potency.

In comparison to the brown recluse spider, the Chilean recluse supposedly has more potent venom and the Mediterranean recluse's venom has been said to be less potent. However, these comparisons are more anecdotal than quantitive assessments.

About 10% of brown recluse bites cause moderate or greater tissue damage and scarring, but the vast majority only result in inflammation and heal well without medical intervention. Deaths have been reported in children, however these are extremely rare occurrences and can be prevented if accurately diagnosed and the proper medical treatment applied.

Medical Misdiagnoses
The problem of misdiagnosis is widespread in North America, including such unlikely places as Alaska and Canada where doctors have attributed skin lesions to recluse bites when no brown recluse spiders have ever been found north of the 48 contiguous U.S. states.

One reason for the great awareness of the recluse spiders throughout North America is that necrotic (rotting flesh) wounds are commonly misdiagnosed as "brown recluse bites." Although recluses can cause these types of wounds, the biological data involving the distribution of the spider indicate that most of these diagnoses are incorrect.

A world-renowned toxicology physician who worked at University of Southern California Medical Center estimates that most general spider bites in California referred to him were actually the work of other arthropods, and that 60% of "brown recluse spider bite" diagnoses came from areas where no Loxosceles spiders were known to exist. This is a serious problem, in that several medical conditions misdiagnosed as recluse bites can lead to debilitating and potentially fatal consequences.

Additionally, many people diagnosed as having brown recluse bites in California are treated with antibiotics. Antibiotics work against bacteria and have no effect on spider venom. However, regardless of the causative agent, it is wise to seek medical attention if you feel that it is warranted.

Because most brown recluse bites involve only inflammation, the recommended treatment is simple first aid: RICE therapy (Rest, Ice, Compression, Elevation) although other medical experts suggest cold instead of ice (to avoid freezing tissue) and a neutral position (lay flat) rather than elevated.


Multiple Lesions
Spiders typically bite only once as a desperate defensive effort before they are crushed between flesh and some object. Therefore, spider bites are not the causes of skin lesions if 1) there are multiple lesions on one person at the same time, especially if the lesions are on widely separated parts of the body, 2) if there are multiple episodes of lesions on the same person over a period of several weeks or months, or 3) if there are multiple people in the same house or facility showing skin lesions at the same time.

Multiple lesions immediately point toward the more likely situation of a contagious bacterial infection like methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or possibly an infestation of an arthropod (fleas, mites, kissing bugs, bed bugs, etc.) that seeks out mammals for blood meals.

