








Ticks are small bugs that can be hard to spot when they’re crawling on you. Tick bites can sometimes spread dangerous diseases, like Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. You can reduce your risk of tick bites by wearing bug spray, covering your skin and checking yourself and your pets for ticks.

Overview:

What Are Tick Bites?

Tick bites are areas on your skin where a tick has latched onto you with its mouthparts. This can sometimes leave a mark or rash. But often, the bite isn’t noticeable at all, unless you catch the tick while it’s still attached. Tick bites can be dangerous because they can spread potentially serious diseases.

Ticks are small, wingless bugs that usually live in the woods or tall grass. They bite people and animals to feed off of their blood. They’re tiny — sometimes as small as a poppy seed — and hard to see on your skin. And you probably won’t feel them bite you, either.

Unlike mosquitoes, ticks don’t just bite and run. They bury their heads into your skin. Then, they feed off your blood for hours or even days. As they fill with blood, they go from flat to rounded. The bites aren’t always harmful on their own. But while a tick is feeding on you, they can transmit bacteria, parasites and viruses into your blood.

Types of tick-borne illnesses
Tick bites can cause:

Alpha-gal syndrome, a reaction to tick spit that causes an allergy to red meat
Anaplasmosis
Babesiosis
Colorado tick fever, a viral infection that can cause a fever, muscle aches and brain inflammation
Ehrlichiosis
Heartland virus disease
Lyme disease, the most common tick-borne illness in the U.S.
Powassan virus
Relapsing fever, a bacterial infection that causes recurring fevers and other symptoms
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI), a condition with symptoms similar to Lyme disease
Tick paralysis, a nerve condition caused by neurotoxins in the tick’s spit
Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE)
Tularemia

Symptoms and Causes:

Symptoms of tick-borne illnesses

Symptoms of conditions caused by tick bites could include:

Fever
Chills
Muscle pain
Headaches
Tiredness
Itchiness or irritation
Nausea and vomiting
Swollen lymph nodes
Allergic reaction to eating red meat
Skin rash
The rash might look like a circle or a bullseye. Or it might be small, red or purplish spots that are actually spots of blood under your skin (petechiae).

What does a tick bite look like?

Tick bites themselves often don’t cause noticeable symptoms like mosquito bites do. Sometimes, they might cause a bump, swelling or itching. You most often know you were bitten by a tick because you catch them attached to you.

Where on your body do ticks bite?

Ticks can climb onto any part of your body. But they often move to warm, moist areas to latch on. Common places on your body to find ticks include:

On your scalp and neck
In your groin
Behind your knees
In your belly button
In or around your ears
In your armpits
Around your waist
Why do ticks bite?
Ticks bite because blood is their source of food. Young ticks (nymphs) hatch in spring and find an animal or person to feed off of. They mature into adults and take another meal in the fall. Tick bites are most common in spring, early summer and fall, but you can get bitten anytime.

Management and Treatment:

What should you do about a tick bite?

If you notice a tick biting you, you can remove it with these steps:

Gently clean the area around the tick with a cotton ball soaked in rubbing alcohol or warm, soapy water.
Use rounded-end tweezers to gently but firmly pinch the tick near its head, as close to your skin as possible. Don’t crush the tick’s body (this can push more germs into your body) or touch it with your hands.
Take note (or a good photo) of what the tick looks like. Is it flat or rounded (engorged)? Does it have markings on its back? Save it in a container if you can. This can help your provider know how long the tick was biting you and how likely it is that it transmitted diseases.
Wash the bite area thoroughly with soap and water.
If you’re unsure how long the tick was attached or if you develop symptoms, contact your provider.
Don’t use kerosene, petroleum jelly (like Vaseline®) or a lit match to remove the tick.

Tick-borne disease treatment
Certain tick-borne illnesses are treated with antibiotics or antiparasitics. For others, there are no specific treatments.

Prevention:

Can tick bites be prevented?

You can reduce your risk of tick bites by:

Avoiding long grass and woods: Keep your grass cut shorter than 5 inches. Stay near the center of cleared paths while in wooded areas.
Using bug spray: Check to make sure it contains DEET, picaridin, IR3535 or other ingredients approved to keep ticks away. Sources like the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have guides that can help you find the repellent that’s right for you.
Covering your skin: Cover as much of your skin as possible with clothing when you’re in areas that might have ticks. This includes long pants, long sleeves and socks.
Checking yourself for ticks: Pay special attention to areas where ticks like to hide on your body. If possible, have someone else check you in places you can’t see yourself (like your back and scalp). Do this every morning and evening to limit the amount of time a tick might be attached to you.
Checking your pets, too: Pets can bring ticks into your house. Check your pets for ticks often, especially after they’ve been outside. You can also ask your veterinarian about the best way to protect your pets from ticks.
Preparing for travel: Before traveling, talk to your travel healthcare clinic or provider, or check with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Consider getting vaccinated against tick-borne encephalitis if you’re planning on traveling to an area where it spreads.

Living With:

What are the different kinds of ticks?
Some of the most common ticks in the U.S. include:

Blacklegged tick (deer tick). Deer ticks are usually black with areas of reddish-brown or white on their backs, depending on whether they’re adults or nymphs.
Dog tick (wood tick). Dog ticks have whitish markings on their backs. Adults are slightly larger than deer ticks.
Lone Star tick. Adult female Lone Star ticks have a distinctive white dot on their backs. Males and nymphs are brown or reddish with black markings.


Diseases spread by ticks are among the most common travel-related illnesses. Often overlooked, these diseases are frequently seen in travelers returning from safaris and other outdoor activities. Preventing tick bites, checking for ticks after being outside, and removing any attached ticks are essential steps in preventing tickborne disease.

Preventing Tick Bites
No vaccine is available in the United States to prevent diseases spread by ticks; however, you can take steps to reduce your risk of getting a tick bite:

Dress appropriately: wear light-colored clothing, wear long pants and sleeves, tuck in shirts, tuck pants into socks, and wear closed-toe shoes.
Use insect repellents on the skin that contain at least 20% DEET. (“Natural” products, such as citronella, are not effective.)
Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear, or treat your gear and clothing with permethrin before departure.
Stay out of tall grass, brush, or heavily wooded areas; walk in the center of hiking trails.

Checking for Ticks
It can take several hours for a tick to attach and begin transmitting the disease, so the sooner the tick can be found and removed, the better. Checking for ticks frequently increases the likelihood of finding a tick before it can transmit the bacteria. Bathe or shower as soon as possible after coming indoors. Then do a full-body tick check with a handheld or full-length mirror. Parents should check their children for ticks under the arms, in and around the ears, inside the belly button, behind the knees, between the legs, around the waist, and especially in their hair. Examine gear and pets; ticks can ride into the home on clothing and pets, and then attach to a person later. Last, tumble clothes in a dryer on high heat for an hour to kill remaining ticks.

Removing Ticks
If you find a tick, use tweezers to grasp it as close to the skin as possible. Pull upward with steady, even pressure. Don’t twist or jerk the tick; this can cause the mouth-parts to break off and remain in the skin. If this happens, remove the mouth-parts with tweezers. If you are unable to remove the mouth-parts easily with clean tweezers, leave it alone and let the skin heal. After removing the tick, thoroughly clean the bite area and your hands with rubbing alcohol, an iodine scrub, or soap and water.

Symptoms of Diseases Spread by Ticks
Common symptoms include:

Fever/chills
Headache
Fatigue
Muscle or joint pain
Rash
Contact your doctor if you feel seriously ill, especially if you have a fever. Tell your doctor about your travel history, including what countries you visited and what you did there. Be sure to mention if you remember seeing or being bitten by a tick. Keep in mind that symptoms can appear after you return home or while abroad.

Preventing tick bites on people
Before you go outdoors
Know where to expect ticks. Ticks live in grassy, brushy, or wooded areas, or even on animals. Spending time outside walking your dog, camping, gardening, or hunting could bring you in close contact with ticks. Many people get ticks in their own yard or neighborhood.
Treat clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin. Permethrin can be used to treat boots, clothing and camping gear and remain protective through several washings. Alternatively, you can buy permethrin-treated clothing and gear.
Avoid contact with ticks. Avoid wooded and brushy areas with high grass and leaf litter. Walk in the center of trails.
Use Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, IR3535, Oil of Lemon Eucalyptus (OLE), para-menthane-diol (PMD), or 2-undecanone. EPA's helpful search tool can help you find the product that best suits your needs. Always follow product instructions. Do not use products containing OLE or PMD on children under 3 years old. When used as directed, EPA-registered insect repellents are proven safe and effective, even for pregnant and breastfeeding women.
If you are using sunscreen, apply sunscreen first and insect repellent second.

After you come indoors
Check your clothing for ticks. Ticks may be carried into the house on clothing. Any ticks that are found should be removed. Tumble dry clothes in a dryer on high heat for 10 minutes to kill ticks on dry clothing after you come indoors. If the clothes are damp, additional time may be needed. If the clothes require washing first, hot water is recommended. Cold and medium temperature water will not kill ticks.
Examine gear and pets. Ticks can ride into the home on clothing and pets, then attach to a person later, so carefully examine pets, coats, and daypacks.
Shower soon after being outdoors. Showering within two hours of coming indoors has been shown to reduce your risk of getting Lyme disease and may be effective in reducing the risk of other tickborne diseases. Showering may help wash off unattached ticks and it is a good opportunity to do a tick check.
Check your body for ticks after being outdoors. Conduct a full body check upon return from potentially tick-infested areas, including your own backyard. Use a hand-held or full-length mirror to view all parts of your body. Check these parts of your body and your child's body for ticks:
Under the arms
In and around the ears
Inside belly button
Back of the knees
In and around the hair
Between the legs
Around the waist


Reducing risk of tick exposure around homes
Apply pesticides outdoors to control ticks
Use of pesticides can reduce the number of ticks in treated areas of your yard. However, you should not rely on spraying to reduce your risk of infection.

When using pesticides, always follow label instructions. Before spraying, check with local health or agricultural officials about:

The best time to apply pesticide in your area
The best type of pesticide to use
Rules and regulations regarding pesticide application on residential properties


Symptoms
Many tickborne diseases can have similar signs and symptoms. If you get a tick bite and develop the symptoms below within a few weeks, see your healthcare provider.

The most common symptoms of tick-related illnesses include:

Fever/chills. All tickborne diseases can cause fever.
Aches and pains. Tickborne diseases can cause headache, fatigue, and muscle aches. People with Lyme disease may also have joint pain.
Rash. Lyme disease, Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI), Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), ehrlichiosis, and tularemia can cause distinctive rashes.
Your healthcare provider should evaluate the following before deciding on a plan for treatment:

Your symptoms,
the geographic region where you were bitten, and
lab tests, depending on the symptoms and the geographic region where you were bitten.


How it spreads
How ticks find their hosts
Ticks find their hosts by detecting animals´ breath and body odors, or by sensing body heat, moisture, and vibrations. Some species can even recognize a shadow. In addition, ticks pick a place to wait by identifying well-used paths. Then they wait for a host, resting on the tips of grasses and shrubs. Ticks can't fly or jump, but many tick species wait in a position known as "questing".

While questing, ticks hold onto leaves and grass by their third and fourth pair of legs. They hold the first pair of legs outstretched, waiting to climb on to the host. When a host brushes the spot where a tick is waiting, it quickly climbs aboard. Some ticks will attach quickly and others will wander, looking for places like the ear, or other areas where the skin is thinner.

How ticks spread disease
Ticks transmit pathogens that cause disease through the process of feeding.

Depending on the tick species and its stage of life, preparing to feed can take from 10 minutes to 2 hours. When the tick finds a feeding spot, it grasps the skin and cuts into the surface.
The tick then inserts its feeding tube. Many species also secrete a cement-like substance that keeps them firmly attached during the meal. The feeding tube can have barbs which help keep the tick in place.
Ticks also can secrete small amounts of saliva with anesthetic properties so that the animal or person can't feel that the tick has attached itself. If the tick is in a sheltered spot, it can go unnoticed.
Ticks suck blood anywhere from minutes to days, depending on the tick species. If the host animal has a bloodborne infection, the tick will ingest the pathogens with the blood.
Small amounts of saliva from the tick may also enter the skin of the host animal during the feeding process. If the tick contains a pathogen, the organism may be transmitted to the host animal in this way.
After feeding, most ticks will drop off and prepare for the next life stage. At its next feeding, it can then transmit an acquired disease to the new host.
